---
layout: post
title: "Redis Simplified"
description: "What can I do with it?"
category: tech
comments: true
tags: [Redis,Usecase]
---

Redis is many things but essentially its an in-memory key-value store.

Conventionally defined as:
> An in-memory, fast non-relational database with key:value mapping. It has persistent storage, replication to scale read performance & client side sharding.

All this means:
- You can store key-value pairs to disk
- You can replicate redis nodes so that you can read faster
- You can also shard redis nodes.
- You can do master/slave replication as well.

## Saving Key value pairs
Let's set a key value pair.

```
$ redis-cli
redis 127.0.0.1:6379> set hello world
OK
```

Le magic. You've now set hello:world.
Run `GET hello` to get world back.

[ You don't need to use the CLI. There are redis 'clients' for most common languages like Python,Ruby and JS]

PS: Commonly in redis, we use the format `foo:bar:variable` for keys. Remember since strings are hashed, you can keep a big string and you wont lose huge perfomance, but try to balance readability and performance.

## Core Data Structures in Redis
There are 5 main data structures in redis:  

### 1. Strings

This looks like your classical key:value pairs. You can do things like `SET`,`GET`, & `DEL`.

### 2. Lists

This is where things get interesting. You can store Linked-Lists in redis and do common things like push, pop, access by index, & retrieve the whole list.. 

### 3. Sets

Super obvious, but you can store a unique set of strings, check  for membership, & view all elements.

### 4. Hashes 
Hashes store a mapping of key:value pairs, similar to a dictionary in python. You can access individual elements of the hash, or set the value.

### 5. Sorted Set (ZSET)

Redis offers a unique data-structure. Its a 'sorted' dictionary in which you can store key:value pairs [values are called scores] except the values must be floating point numbers. You can access the ZSet via the key but also by the sorted order of the values (scores).

Remeber *the dictionary is sorted by the* ***values*** *not the key*.

## What can I do with it?

### 1. Cache [but a persistant one]
Save session caches or use it for a Full-Page Cache. The sky's the limit.

### 2. Publish-Subscribe
Redis has an inbuilt Publisher-Subscriber feature where you need to only subscribe to a channel to get the messages.

### 3. Somekind of Counter 
Go wild, use it as a counter for *page views* or *likes* or a *leaderboard* or any kind of statistic. Its easy enough to make a key for each webpage you have and increment/decrement views via the inbuilt commands (INCR and DECR).

### 4. Machine Learning
You need a large in-memory data system, which is also fast? Well, redis does this. Its inbuilt RedisML may be what you are looking for, else build your own solution and use redis as a way to store your data.

### 5. Store Objects in a key:val fashion
Need to save your user data? Keep them in a Hash! Its simple enough. Make a key like, `user:19283` and store name, email-id, visits.

### 6. User Network
Need to build a facebook or LinkedIn kind of network? Build it using sets. Using a key like `friends:user:19283` add user 19283's friends via their unique ID. You can easily express Friend-of-Friend functionality via a Breadth first search.

### 7. Queues
Implement any kind of queue via lists in Redis. Maybe you want to build a Job Queue, or a processing queue, doesnt matter since



